Issue/391 document migration from one running orchestrator to another one (#6108)
inmanta/inmanta-core: docs/administrators/upgrading_the_orchestrator.rst

.. _upgrading_the_orchestrator:

Upgrading the orchestrator
-------------------------

Migrating from one running orchestrator to another running orchestrator
#######################################################################

This document describes how to upgrade to a new version of the orchestrator by setting
up a new orchestrator next to the existing orchestrator and migrating all the state from
the existing to the new orchestrator. This procedure should be followed when an in-place
update of the orchestrator is not possible e.g. when the operating system needs to be
updated alongside the orchestrator.

Terminology
+++++++++++

The procedure below describes how to migrate from one running orchestrator
denoted as the 'old orchestrator' to another one denoted as the 'new orchestrator'.

Procedure
+++++++++

.. note::
    **Pre-requisite**

>     - Before upgrading the orchestrator to a new major version, an update should be done first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Before upgrading the orchestrator to a new major version, an update should be done to the latest version of the current major version.
```

>     - Upgrades should be done one major version at a time. So if you want to upgrade from major
>       version :code:`X` to major version :code:`X+2`, you should do an upgrade from :code:`X` to :code:`X+1` and then from :code:`X+1` to :code:`X+2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Upgrades should be done one major version at a time. Upgrading from major
      version :code:`X` to major version :code:`X+2`, should be done by upgrading from :code:`X` to :code:`X+1` and then from :code:`X+1` to :code:`X+2`.
```

_________

1. **[New Orchestrator]**: Make sure the desired version of the orchestrator is installed, by following the
installation instructions (see :ref:`install-server`) and set up a project manually, validating that the setup
of the orchestrator works (config, credentials, access to packages, etc.).

_________

2. **[Old Orchestrator]** Halt all environments (by pressing the ``STOP`` button in the web-console for each environment).
3. **[Old Orchestrator]** Stop the server:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo systemctl disable --now inmanta-server.service

4. **[Old Orchestrator]** Make a dump of the server database using ``pgdump``.

.. code-block:: bash

    pg_dump -U <user> -W -h <host> <db_name> > <db_dump_file>

_________

5. **[New Orchestrator]** Make sure the server is stopped:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo systemctl stop inmanta-server.service

> 6. **[New Orchestrator]** Load the dump of the server database using ``psql``.

Reviewer 2: You may have to drop the DB first, as it already has the DB initialized on the wrong version .

Did you test this procedure?

Author: Not yet, I will test it out now that the procedure is fleshed out

.. code-block:: bash

    cat <db_dump_file> | psql -U <user> -W -h <host> <db_name>

7. **[New Orchestrator]** Start the orchestrator service, it will take some time before the orchestrator goes up, as some database migration will be done:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo systemctl enable --now inmanta-server.service

8. **[New Orchestrator]** When accessing the web console, all the environments will be visible, and still halted.
9. **[New Orchestrator]** One environment at a time:

   a. Disable the ``auto_deploy`` option in the environment settings.  (``/console/settings?env=<your-env-id>&state.Settings.tab=Configuration``)

   b. In the **Desired State** page of the environment, click ``Update project & recompile``, accessible via the
   dropdown of the ``Recompile`` button. (``/console/desiredstate?env=<your-env-id>``).

   .. warning::

       Make sure the compilation has finished and was successful before moving on to the next steps.

>    c. Resume the environment by pressing the green ``Resume`` button in the bottom left corner of the console.

Reviewer: I see your point, but I don't think we have support to enable the agents in dry-run only mode. Unless we delete all the old versions from the server, but that is not an acceptable solution either.

>    c. Resume the environment by pressing the green ``Resume`` button in the bottom left corner of the console.

Reviewer: I see.

.. _upgrading_the_orchestrator:

> Upgrading the orchestrator
> -------------------------

Reviewer: This causes a warning in the build log.
```suggestion
Upgrading the orchestrator
--------------------------
```

Upgrading by migrating from one orchestrator to another orchestrator
#######################################################################

This document describes how to upgrade to a new version of the orchestrator by setting
up a new orchestrator next to the existing orchestrator and migrating all the state from

> the existing to the new orchestrator. This procedure should be followed when an in-place
> update of the orchestrator is not possible e.g. when the operating system needs to be
> updated alongside the orchestrator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the existing to the new orchestrator. This procedure should be followed when an in-place
upgrade of the orchestrator is not possible e.g. when the operating system needs to be
upgraded alongside the orchestrator.
```

Terminology
+++++++++++

The procedure below describes how to migrate from one running orchestrator
denoted as the 'old orchestrator' to another one denoted as the 'new orchestrator'.

Procedure
+++++++++

.. note::
    **Pre-requisite**

    - Before upgrading the orchestrator to a new major version, make sure the old orchestrator is at the latest version available within its major.
    - Upgrades should be done one major version at a time. Upgrading from major
      version :code:`X` to major version :code:`X+2`, should be done by upgrading from :code:`X` to :code:`X+1` and then from :code:`X+1` to :code:`X+2`.

_________

1. **[New Orchestrator]**: Make sure the desired version of the orchestrator is installed, by following the

> installation instructions (see :ref:`install-server`) and set up a project manually, validating that the setup
> of the orchestrator works (config, credentials, access to packages, etc.).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
installation instructions (see :ref:`install-server`) and set up a project to validate that the orchestrator is configured correctly (config, credentials, access to packages, etc.).
```

_________

2. **[Old Orchestrator]** Halt all environments (by pressing the ``STOP`` button in the web-console for each environment).
3. **[Old Orchestrator]** Stop the server:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo systemctl disable --now inmanta-server.service

> 4. **[Old Orchestrator]** Make a dump of the server database using ``pgdump``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. **[Old Orchestrator]** Make a dump of the server database using ``pg_dump``.
```

.. code-block:: bash

>     pg_dump -U <user> -W -h <host> <db_name> > <db_dump_file>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    pg_dump -U <db_user> -W -h <host> <db_name> > <db_dump_file>
```

_________

5. **[New Orchestrator]** Make sure the server is stopped:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo systemctl stop inmanta-server.service

6. **[New Orchestrator]** Drop the inmanta database and recreate it:

.. code-block:: bash

    # drop the database

>     psql -h <host> -U <user> -W
>     drop database <db_name>;
> 
>     # re-create it
>     sudo -u postgres -i bash -c "createdb -O <user> <db_name>"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    $ psql -h <host> -U <db_user> -W
    drop database <db_name>;
    exit

    # re-create it
    $ sudo -u postgres -i bash -c "createdb -O <db_user> <db_name>"
```

7. **[New Orchestrator]** Load the dump of the server database using ``psql``.

.. code-block:: bash

>     cat <db_dump_file> | psql -U <user> -W -h <host> <db_name>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    cat <db_dump_file> | psql -U <db_user> -W -h <host> <db_name>
```

> 8. **[New Orchestrator]** Start the orchestrator service, it will take some time before the orchestrator goes up, as some database migration will be done:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. **[New Orchestrator]** Start the orchestrator service, it might take some time before the orchestrator goes up, as some database migration will be done:
```

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo systemctl enable --now inmanta-server.service

9. **[New Orchestrator]** When accessing the web console, all the environments will be visible, and still halted.
10. **[New Orchestrator]** One environment at a time:

    a. In the **Desired State** page of the environment, click ``Update project & recompile``, accessible via the
    dropdown of the ``Recompile`` button. (``/console/desiredstate?env=<your-env-id>``).

    b. Resume the environment by pressing the green ``Resume`` button in the bottom left corner of the console.

    .. warning::

>         Make sure the compilation has finished and was successful before moving on to the next steps.

Reviewer: Don't we need this note between step `a` and `b`?

Author: The issue is that hitting update project and recompile in an halted environment queues the compile but it will only get triggered once the environment is resumed : See this [conversation](https://inmanta.slack.com/archives/CKRF0C8R3/p1686833026136659) (and the [comment](https://github.com/inmanta/inmanta-core/pull/6108#discussion_r1227985660))
